JUDY WOODRUFF: The Trump
administration, as you
heard, is taking steps
to increasing America's
military presence in
Afghanistan, after years of
reducing U.S. forces there.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Since taking
office, the Trump administration
has been conducting a
review of America's
16-year war in Afghanistan.
The current U.S. commander
there, General John Nicholson,
has recommended sending 3,000
to 5,000 more troops to augment
the 10,000 Americans and
3,000 allied forces that are
already in the country.
Today, Defense Secretary
James Mattis announced
that the president had now
given him the authority
to decide appropriate
troop levels.
For more on all of this, we
turn to retired Lieutenant
General Douglas Lute.
He served on the National
Security Council staffs in both
the George W. Bush and Barack
Obama administrations, where
he focused on Afghanistan,
Iraq, and South Asia.
For the past four years, he
served as U.S. ambassador to
NATO, and he's now a senior
fellow at Harvard University.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE (RET.),
Former U.S. Ambassador
to NATO: Good to be here.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, let's talk
first off about this decision
by the president to hand
General -- or Secretary
of Defense James Mattis
the decision-making
for troop levels.
How unusual is that?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, it is
unusual, but I think we should
first appreciate that we should
have confidence in the entire
Pentagon chain of command,
starting with Secretary Mattis,
but all the way down through
Central Command, and then
ultimately to General Nicholson,
Mick Nicholson, who you
mentioned, who is our
commander, four-star
commander in Afghanistan.
So, this is a very experienced
team, responsible individuals.
They're going to take this,
this new authority seriously.
I also think there is a logic.
There is a rationale to
providing the Pentagon
some flexibility.
It gives them more agility to
fit the number of troops to
the task in Afghanistan, and
that all makes sense.
It does, however, raise one
concern, and that's the concern
that strategy is made up of a
lot more than just
the Pentagon piece.
And so I would be concerned,
or I would be interested in
hearing how the administration
intends to make sure that the
other pieces, the political side
of the equation, the diplomatic
equation, the economic
assistance equation,
the intelligence
community's role, how all
these various pieces are fit
together in a coherent hole.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, you
raise a very good question,
because, traditionally, we think
of a strategy being set from
the top, from the president,
with advice from all of the
relevant agencies below.
What do you think this does
to the decision-making process
for a country like Afghanistan?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I think
it's too soon to tell.
The traditional role is that
the National Security Council
would have this oversight
role, this coordinating role,
to make sure that the strategy
stays aligned over time
and that all the pieces
relate to one another
in a coherent way.
It's not clear whether this
move to give additional
authorities, additional
autonomy to the Pentagon
is just the opening step, or
whether there will still be a
role for the NSC, the National
Security Council, led
by H.R. McMaster, to
oversee the whole process.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, we have
said Mattis and Nicholson
both believe that more U.S.
troops to Afghanistan
is a good idea.
Do you share that belief?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I think a
few more -- a few thousand or
even 10,000 more U.S. troops...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Ten thousand more?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: I'm saying that
I think that, hypothetically,
an increase on that scale,
let's say, for example, a
doubling of U.S. troops -- there
are some 8,500 there now -- can
help sustain the current
security stalemate.
But I don't believe that
troops alone will actually
be decisive in the end.
Troops alone can't win this war.
Troops alone will not
remove the stalemate.
The stalemate fundamentally
rests on the political
side of the equation.
So, alongside any
military surge, any --
the addition of any number
of U.S. troops, I will
be very interested to hear the
administration's ambitions in
terms of how they're going to
deal with the politics.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Well, explain
what the challenges are there
for the politics in Afghanistan.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I look
at this as a three-part
equation on the political side.
So, first of all, inside the
Afghan government itself, here
you have zero-sum politics among
the different national players.
You have a high
level of corruption.
You have the patronage network.
You have a long period
of time where you have
actually had stalemate
from the central government
itself.
Second, you have stalemate
between Afghanistan
and its neighboring
states, most prominently
Pakistan, but not just Pakistan.
We only have to look at the map
and see the geographic equation
here, which includes Iran
to the west, Central Asia,
and Russia to the north, and
beyond, to the northeast China,
and further to the east, India.
So this is a very complex
regional diplomatic equation.
All those players I have just
mention have some impact on
what happens inside Afghanistan.
And then, ultimately,
to bring this war to a
conclusion, a political
end, which the military
equation should be in support
of, it involves politics between
the Afghan government and
the Taliban, the opponent.
And so on all three of
these fronts, inside
Kabul, in the region, and
between the government
and the insurgents, there's a
real need for a political surge.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Among those
neighbors, Pakistan obviously
looms very large in Afghanistan,
and provide a consistent safe
haven for the Taliban that are
waging this massive insurgency
in the country.
How can the U.S. get Pakistan
to help us in that fight?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, first of
all, I think you have to place
our requirements, our demands
on Pakistan in this part of
the arena, that is, their
support for the Taliban, in the
context of our other
interests in Pakistan.
And we actually have several
interests in Pakistan which
I think surpass our interest
in dealing with
the Afghan Taliban.
I would label Pakistan's
internal stability itself.
Here you have more than
180 million Pakistanis
in a country where you
have not just the Afghan
Taliban, but the Pakistani
Taliban, remnants of al-Qaida,
and other regional terrorist
groups, all of which threaten
the stability of the state.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A
nuclear-powered state.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: And a state
which has the fastest
growing, the fastest
expanding nuclear arsenal
in the world.
So, that very dangerous cocktail
of terrorists, extremists, and
nuclear weapons is actually
probably more of a
vital national interest
to us than Pakistan's
support for the Afghan
Taliban.
So, there's a large array
of complex interests
here which are at play.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even if the
administration articulates a
strategy, do you think that
this administration can
execute that strategy?
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Well, I
think, right now, they're
working with a handicap.
And that is, while the National
Security Council itself, those
who set strategy and overwatch
the strategy, is largely
in place, the implementers
of the strategy are
largely not in place,
because they have a
large number of vacancies
among those officials who
are yet to be nominated
and confirmed by the
Senate, especially in
the Defense Department
and the State Department.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Former
Ambassador Douglas Lute,
thank you very much.
LT.
GEN.
DOUGLAS LUTE: Thank you.